Branch Deployment Guide (#9046)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/content/guides/dagster/branch-depl-with-snowflake.mdx

---
title: Dagster Cloud Branch Deployments with Snowflake | Dagster
description: This guide illustrates a workflow that enables testing Dagster code in your cloud environment without impacting your production data.
---

# Dagster Cloud Branch Deployments with Snowflake

<Note>This guide is applicable to Dagster Cloud.</Note>

This guide details a workflow to test Dagster code in your cloud environment without impacting your production data. To highlight this functionality, we’ll leverage Dagster Cloud branch deployments and a Snowflake database to:

- Execute code on a feature branch directly on Dagster Cloud
- Read and write to a unique per-branch clone of our Snowflake data

With these tools, we can merge changes with confidence in the impact on our data platform and with assurance that our code will execute as intended.

> If you’re new to Dagster, here’s an overview of the main concepts we’ll be using:

Reviewer: with the switch to defining what the concepts will do, I think prefacing this with "If you're new to dagster" is unnecessary. 
```suggestion
Here’s an overview of the main concepts we’ll be using:
```

- [Ops](/concepts/ops-jobs-graphs/ops) - We'll define two ops that query Snowflake: the first will clone a database, and the second will drop database clones.
- [Graphs](/concepts/ops-jobs-graphs/graphs) - We'll build graphs that define the order our ops should run.
- [Jobs](/concepts/ops-jobs-graphs/jobs#jobs) - We'll define jobs by binding our graphs to resources.
- [Resources](/concepts/resources) - We'll use the [Snowflake resource](/\_apidocs/libraries/dagster-snowflake#dagster_snowflake.snowflake_resource) to swap in different Snowflake connections to our jobs depending on environment.
- [I/O managers](/concepts/io-management/io-managers) - We'll use a Snowflake I/O manager to persist asset outputs to Snowflake.

---

## Prerequisites

<Note>
  This guide is an extension of the{" "}
  <a href="/guides/dagster/local-to-production-tutorial">
    Transitioning Data Pipelines from Development to Production
  </a>{" "}
  guide, illustrating a workflow for staging deployments. We’ll use the examples
  from this guide to build a workflow atop Dagster Cloud’s branch deployment
  feature.
</Note>

To complete the steps in this guide, you'll need:

> - A Dagster Cloud account

Reviewer: link to the sign up page?

Reviewer 2: +1

> - An existing [Branch Deployments setup that uses GitHub actions](https://docs.dagster.cloud/guides/branch-deployments). After following this guide, you should have:

Reviewer: bump on this again

  - A running agent to serve your branch deployments
  - A Dagster project set up for branch deployments containing:
    - `branch_deployments.yml` GitHub workflow file
    - Dagster repository (we’ve named ours `repo`)
    - Dockerfile that installs your Dagster project

---

## Overview

We have a `PRODUCTION` Snowflake database with a schema named `HACKER_NEWS`. In our production cloud environment, we’d like to write tables to Snowflake containing subsets of Hacker News data. These tables will be:

- `ITEMS` - A table containing the entire dataset
- `COMMENTS` - A table containing data about comments
- `STORIES` - A table containing data about stories

To set up a branch deployment workflow to construct and test these tables, we will:

1. Define these tables as [assets](/concepts/assets/software-defined-assets).
2. Configure our assets to write to Snowflake using a different connection (credentials and database name) for two environments: production and branch deployment.

> 3. Clone our production database upon each branch deployment launch, naming each clone `PRODUCTION_CLONE_<ID>`, where `<ID>` is the pull request ID of the branch. Then we'll create a branch deployment and test our Hacker News assets against our newly cloned database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Write a job that will clone the production database upon each branch deployment launch. Each clone will be named `PRODUCTION_CLONE_<ID>`, where `<ID>` is the pull request ID of the branch. Then we'll create a branch deployment and test our Hacker News assets against our newly cloned database.
```

could be helpful to say how we'll do the cloning

> 4. Delete the corresponding database clone upon closing the feature branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Write a job that will delete the corresponding database clone upon closing the feature branch.
```

same as above

)
def items(context) -> pd.DataFrame:
    """Items from the Hacker News API: each is a story or a comment on a story."""
    rows = []
    max_id = requests.get(
        "https://hacker-news.firebaseio.com/v0/maxitem.json", timeout=5
    ).json()
    # Hacker News API is 1-indexed, so adjust range by 1
    for item_id in range(max_id - context.op_config["N"] + 1, max_id + 1):
        item_url = f"https://hacker-news.firebaseio.com/v0/item/{item_id}.json"
        rows.append(requests.get(item_url, timeout=5).json())

    # ITEM_FIELD_NAMES is a list of the column names in the Hacker News dataset
    result = pd.DataFrame(rows, columns=ITEM_FIELD_NAMES).drop_duplicates(subset=["id"])
    result.rename(columns={"by": "user_id"}, inplace=True)
    return result

@asset(
    io_manager_key="snowflake_io_manager",
)
def comments(items: pd.DataFrame) -> pd.DataFrame:
    """Comments from the Hacker News API."""
    return items[items["type"] == "comment"]

@asset(
    io_manager_key="snowflake_io_manager",
)
def stories(items: pd.DataFrame) -> pd.DataFrame:
    """Stories from the Hacker News API."""
    return items[items["type"] == "story"]
```

> As you can see, our assets use a [I/O manager](/concepts/io-management/io-managers) named `snowflake_io_manager` (source code available in the [Transitioning Data Pipelines from Development to Production](/guides/dagster/local-to-production-tutorial#part-one-local-development) guide). Using I/O managers and other resources allow us to swap out implementations per environment without modifying our business logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, our assets use an [I/O manager](/concepts/io-management/io-managers) named `snowflake_io_manager`. Using I/O managers and other resources allow us to swap out implementations per environment without modifying our business logic.
```
the snowflake IO manager source code is in the dagster-snowflake library, not in the local to prod guide

---

## Step 2: Configure our job for each environment

At runtime, we’d like to determine which environment our code is running in: branch deployment, or production. This information dictates how our code should execute, specifically with which credentials and with which database.

To ensure we can't accidentally write to production from within our branch deployment, we’ll use a different set of credentials from production and write to our database clone.

Dagster automatically sets certain environment variables containing deployment metadata, allowing us to read these environment variables to discern between deployments. We can access the `DAGSTER_CLOUD_IS_BRANCH_DEPLOYMENT` environment variable to determine the currently executing environment. Refer to [TODO: PAGE TITLE]() for a full list of preset environment variables.

Because we want to configure our assets to write to Snowflake using a different set of credentials and database in each environment, we’ll configure a separate I/O manager for each environment:

```python file=/guides/dagster/local_to_production/branch_depl_tutorial/repository_v1.py startafter=start_repository endbefore=end_repository
@repository
def repo():

>     snowflake_config = {

Reviewer: This is what the config ends up looking like for production in the local to prod guide 

```
{
                    "account": "abc1234.us-east-1",
                    "user": "system@company.com",
                    "password": {"env": "SYSTEM_SNOWFLAKE_PASSWORD"},
                    "database": "PRODUCTION",
                    "schema": "HACKER_NEWS",
                }
```

i think making `account` `user` and `password` match between the guides would help with continuity for someone who is using both to set up prod and branch deployments

        "account": {"env": "SNOWFLAKE_ACCOUNT"},
        "user": {"env": "SNOWFLAKE_USER"},
        "password": {"env": "SNOWFLAKE_PASSWORD"},
        "schema": "HACKER_NEWS",
    }
    resource_defs = {
        "branch": {
            "snowflake_io_manager": snowflake_io_manager.configured(
                {
                    **snowflake_config,
                    "database": f"PRODUCTION_CLONE_{os.getenv('DAGSTER_CLOUD_PULL_REQUEST_ID')}",
                }
            ),
        },
        "production": {
            "snowflake_io_manager": snowflake_io_manager.configured(
                {
                    **snowflake_config,
                    "database": "PRODUCTION",
                }
            ),
        },
    }

>     def get_current_env():

Reviewer: should we come up with a function that will return `production` `local` or `branch` ?

Author: Hm.. this is what I had originally, but if we added `local`, we'd also have to define unused resources for local development. I think the feedback there was that adding local development was unnecessary and would add bloat to the guide

Reviewer: yeah bloating the config would be bad.

I'm just wondering if somewhere we should have a suggested way for people to determine local vs branch vs prod. something like 

```
def get_current_env():
     is_branch_depl = os.getenv("DAGSTER_CLOUD_IS_BRANCH_DEPLOYMENT")
     if is_branch_depl:
         return "branch"
     else:
            return os.getenv("DAGSTER_DEPLOYMENT", "local")
```

maybe it wouldn't be written in this guide, but if you're making a full code example of the guide it could be in there with the config for every deployment type and then we can just have a note in the guide saying to look there

Author: Yeah this is a good call. After the guide is close to done, I'll add a full installable code example that also includes local development

        is_branch_depl = os.getenv("DAGSTER_CLOUD_IS_BRANCH_DEPLOYMENT")
        assert is_branch_depl != None  # env var must be set
        return "branch" if is_branch_depl else "prod"

    return [
        with_resources([items, comments, stories], resource_defs=resource_defs[get_current_env()]),
    ]
```

---

## Step 3: Clone a production database per branch deployment

The `branch_deployments.yml` workflow file from the [quickstart template](https://github.com/dagster-io/dagster-cloud-branch-deployments-quickstart) defines a `dagster_cloud_build_push` job that builds each branch deployment. We can modify this workflow file to add a custom step that launches a job within our repository that will clone the production database upon deployment.

> We’ll first need to define a job that clones our `PRODUCTION` database for each branch deployment. Each clone will be named `PRODUCTION_CLONE_<ID>` with `<ID>` representing the pull request ID, ensuring each branch deployment has a unique clone. This job will drop a database clone if it exists and then reclone from production, ensuring each redeployment has a fresh clone of `PRODUCTION`:

Reviewer: I think I'm still missing a connection to when the branch deployment is redeployed. I think a sentence directly saying that updates to a PR cause a redeployment would help

Reviewer: ah i see it lower down in the section. maybe could mention it here to though

We can then add the `clone_prod` job to our repository, configuring it with the resources corresponding to the current environment. We can modify the resource mapping by environment in our repository as follows:

```python file=/guides/dagster/local_to_production/branch_depl_tutorial/repository_v2.py startafter=start_resources endbefore=end_resources
resource_defs = {
    "branch": {
        "snowflake_io_manager": snowflake_io_manager.configured(
            {
                **snowflake_config,
                "database": f"PRODUCTION_CLONE_{os.getenv('DAGSTER_CLOUD_PULL_REQUEST_ID')}",
            }
        ),
        "snowflake": snowflake_resource.configured(
            {
                **snowflake_config,
                "database": f"PRODUCTION_CLONE_{os.getenv('DAGSTER_CLOUD_PULL_REQUEST_ID')}",
            }
        ),
    },
    "production": {
        "snowflake_io_manager": snowflake_io_manager.configured(
            {
                **snowflake_config,
                "database": "PRODUCTION",
            }
        ),
        "snowflake": snowflake_resource.configured({**snowflake_config, "database": "PRODUCTION"}),
    },
}
```

> Then, we can add the `clone_prod` job to our repository:

Reviewer: do you think people will be nervous about adding the `clone_prod` job to their repo with production credentials? Like I'm assuming this means that the `clone_prod` will show up as a runnable job in production dagit. It would fail since the `DAGSTER_CLOUD_PULL_REQUEST_ID` env var wouldn't exist, but it still might make people nervous to have it hanging around. not sure if there's anything we can do about that though

Author: hmm... yeah the job will fail if it attempts to run on production because the env var won't exist. We can update the job to automatically fail if the deployment isn't a branch deployment

Reviewer: maybe this gets too complicated but can we optionally add the job to the repo if we're in the branch deployment environment? like

```
@repository 
def repo 

     all_defs = [
         with_resources([items, comments, stories], resource_defs=resource_defs[get_current_env()]),
    ]
    if get_current_env() == "branch":
         all_defs.append(clone_prod.to_job(resource_defs=resource_defs[get_current_env()]))

    return all_defs
```

I think this was pitched in one of the meetings where we talked about how to handle providing config based on environment. I can't remember if we decided we weren't going to recommend this approach though

Author: I updated this to conditionally add the branch deployment jobs

```python file=/guides/dagster/local_to_production/branch_depl_tutorial/repository_v2.py startafter=start_repository endbefore=end_repository
@repository
def repo():
    ...
    return [
        with_resources([items, comments, stories], resource_defs=resource_defs[get_current_env()]),
        clone_prod.to_job(resource_defs=resource_defs[get_current_env()]),
    ]
```

> In our `branch_deployments.yml` file, we’ll add an additional step to the existing `dagster_cloud_build_push` job that queues a run of `clone_prod` within each branch deployment upon launch. The `dagster_cloud_build_push` job is triggered on multiple pull request events: `opened`, `synchronize`, `reopen`, and `closed`. This means that upon future pushes to the branch, we'll trigger a run of `clone_prod`. The `if` condition below ensures that `clone_prod` will not be be run if the pull request is closed:

Author: I've made some changes to address 1, 2, and 3--hopefully the guide is clearer now and addresses these questions.

I'll need to double check with someone else about 4, and we can sync on 5 to figure out the issue here

> In our `branch_deployments.yml` file, we’ll add an additional step to the existing `dagster_cloud_build_push` job that queues a run of `clone_prod` within each branch deployment upon launch. The `dagster_cloud_build_push` job is triggered on multiple pull request events: `opened`, `synchronize`, `reopen`, and `closed`. This means that upon future pushes to the branch, we'll trigger a run of `clone_prod`. The `if` condition below ensures that `clone_prod` will not be be run if the pull request is closed:

Reviewer: For 5, the issue was that it didn't immediately cross my mind to look at the job logs in dagit. Once I put the code to trigger the job in the GH action, i just assumed i would be able to see logs there. This might already exist in the guide, but a  mention that logs for the job execution can be found in your cloud branch deployment would be sufficient

```yaml file=/guides/dagster/local_to_production/branch_depl_tutorial/clone_prod.yaml
name: Dagster Branch Deployments
  on:
    pull_request:
      types: [opened, synchronize, reopened, closed]
  env:
    DAGSTER_CLOUD_URL: ${{ secrets.DAGSTER_CLOUD_URL }}
    REGISTRY_URL: ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_URL }}

  jobs:
    dagster_cloud_build_push:
      runs-on: ubuntu-latest
      name: Dagster Branch Deployments
      strategy:
        ...
      steps:
        ...
        - name: Clone Snowflake schema upon launch
          if: github.event.action != 'closed'
          uses: dagster-io/cloud-branch-deployments-action/run@main
          with:
            location: ${{ toJson(matrix.location) }}
            deployment: ${{ steps.deploy.outputs.deployment }}
            repository: repo
            job: clone_prod
          env:
            DAGSTER_CLOUD_API_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.DAGSTER_CLOUD_API_TOKEN }}
```

> Opening a pull request for our current branch will automatically kick off a branch deployment. After the deployment launches, we can confirm that the `clone_prod` job is run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Opening a pull request for our current branch will automatically kick off a branch deployment. After the deployment launches, we can confirm that the `clone_prod` job has run:
```

    result.rename(columns={"by": "user_id"}, inplace=True)
    return result

@asset(
    io_manager_key="snowflake_io_manager",
)
def comments(items: pd.DataFrame) -> pd.DataFrame:
    """Comments from the Hacker News API."""
    return items[items["type"] == "comment"]

@asset(
    io_manager_key="snowflake_io_manager",
)
def stories(items: pd.DataFrame) -> pd.DataFrame:
    """Stories from the Hacker News API."""
    return items[items["type"] == "story"]
```

As you can see, our assets use an [I/O manager](/concepts/io-management/io-managers) named `snowflake_io_manager`. Using I/O managers and other resources allow us to swap out implementations per environment without modifying our business logic.

---

## Step 2: Configure our job for each environment

At runtime, we’d like to determine which environment our code is running in: branch deployment, or production. This information dictates how our code should execute, specifically with which credentials and with which database.

To ensure we can't accidentally write to production from within our branch deployment, we’ll use a different set of credentials from production and write to our database clone.

> Dagster automatically sets certain environment variables containing deployment metadata, allowing us to read these environment variables to discern between deployments. We can access the `DAGSTER_CLOUD_IS_BRANCH_DEPLOYMENT` environment variable to determine the currently executing environment. Refer to [TODO: PAGE TITLE]() for a full list of preset environment variables.

Reviewer: remove TODO PAGE TITLE

@repository
def repo():
    snowflake_config = {
        "account": "abc1234.us-east-1",
        "user": "system@company.com",
        "password": {"env": "SYSTEM_SNOWFLAKE_PASSWORD"},
        "schema": "HACKER_NEWS",
    }
    resource_defs = {
        "branch": {
            "snowflake_io_manager": snowflake_io_manager.configured(
                {
                    **snowflake_config,
                    "database": f"PRODUCTION_CLONE_{os.getenv('DAGSTER_CLOUD_PULL_REQUEST_ID')}",
                }
            ),
        },
        "production": {
            "snowflake_io_manager": snowflake_io_manager.configured(
                {
                    **snowflake_config,
                    "database": "PRODUCTION",
                }
            ),
        },
    }

    def get_current_env():
        is_branch_depl = os.getenv("DAGSTER_CLOUD_IS_BRANCH_DEPLOYMENT")
        assert is_branch_depl != None  # env var must be set
        return "branch" if is_branch_depl else "prod"

    return [
        with_resources([items, comments, stories], resource_defs=resource_defs[get_current_env()]),
    ]
```

---

## Step 3: Clone a production database per branch deployment

> The `branch_deployments.yml` workflow file from the [quickstart template](https://github.com/dagster-io/dagster-cloud-branch-deployments-quickstart) defines a `dagster_cloud_build_push` job that builds each branch deployment. In order to add this workflow file, it must be located in your project directory under `.github/workflows`. We can modify this workflow file to add a custom step that launches a job within our repository that will clone the production database upon deployment.

Reviewer: there's an implication here that they need to get the branch_deployments.yaml from the quickstart template, but if they are on serverless or followed the setup guide then they already have the file 

```suggestion
The `branch_deployments.yml` workflow file in `.github/workflows` defines a `dagster_cloud_build_push` job that builds each branch deployment. We can modify this workflow file to add a custom step that launches a job within our repository that will clone the production database upon deployment.
```

```yaml file=/guides/dagster/local_to_production/branch_depl_tutorial/clone_prod.yaml
# /.github/workflows/branch_deployments.yml

name: Dagster Branch Deployments
  on:
    pull_request:
      types: [opened, synchronize, reopened, closed]
  env:
    DAGSTER_CLOUD_URL: ${{ secrets.DAGSTER_CLOUD_URL }}
    REGISTRY_URL: ${{ secrets.REGISTRY_URL }}

  jobs:
    dagster_cloud_build_push:
      runs-on: ubuntu-latest
      name: Dagster Branch Deployments
      strategy:
        ...
      steps:
        # Existing steps here
        ...
        - name: Clone Snowflake schema upon launch
          if: github.event.action != 'closed'
          uses: dagster-io/cloud-branch-deployments-action/run@main
          with:
            location: ${{ toJson(matrix.location) }}
            deployment: ${{ steps.deploy.outputs.deployment }}
            repository: repo
            job: clone_prod
          env:
            DAGSTER_CLOUD_API_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.DAGSTER_CLOUD_API_TOKEN }}
```

> Opening a pull request for our current branch will automatically kick off a branch deployment. After the deployment launches, we can confirm that the `clone_prod` job has run:

Author: That's odd..mind sending me a link to the github action run in slack? or the branch deployment link?

> Opening a pull request for our current branch will automatically kick off a branch deployment. After the deployment launches, we can confirm that the `clone_prod` job has run:

Reviewer: Here's a link to the runs page of my branch deployment 
https://jamie-bd.dogfood.dagster.cloud/8333241439d8a472601d91a449f576ffcbe7bf53/instance/runs?q%5B%5D=job%3Aclone_prod

if you scroll down a bit there are two runs on Aug 1 at 2:17 and another two on Aug 1 at 12:43

I can try to find the corresponding GH actions, but they don't have clear timestamps, so it'll take a bit more digging
